feat: DH-19683: multi-select combo box component in deephaven.ui (#1349)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/ui/docs/components/multi_select.md

# Multi Select

> Multi select displays selected items as tags inside the input area and presents a filterable dropdown list for multi-selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi-select displays selected items as tags inside the input area and presents a filterable dropdown list for multi-selection.
```

Grammatically correct, but not if the component name itself doesn't have a hypen

## Example

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_basic():
    selected, set_selected = ui.use_state([])

    return ui.multi_select(
        ui.item("red panda"),
        ui.item("cat"),
        ui.item("dog"),
        ui.item("aardvark"),
        ui.item("kangaroo"),
        ui.item("snake"),
        ui.item("ant"),
        label="Favorite Animals",
        selected_keys=selected,
        on_change=set_selected,
    )

my_multi_select_basic = ui_multi_select_basic()
```

## UI Recommendations

Recommendations for creating clear and effective multi selects:

> 1. The multi select's text input simplifies searching through large lists. For lists with fewer than 6 items, use a checkbox group.

Reviewer: link to checkbox group?

4. Options in the multi select should be kept short and concise; multiple lines are strongly discouraged. If more than one line is needed, consider using a description to add context to the option.
5. Choose a `width` for your multi selects that can accommodate most of the available options.
6. The field labels, menu items, and placeholder text should all be in sentence case.
7. Identify which multi selects are required or optional, and use the `is_required` field or the `necessity_indicator` to mark them accordingly.
8. A multi select's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the placeholder text.
9. When an error occurs, the help text specified in a multi select is replaced by error text; thus, ensure both help and error text convey the same essential information to maintain consistent messaging and prevent loss of critical details.
10. Write error messages in a clear, concise, and helpful manner, guiding users to resolve the issue without ambiguity; ideally, they should be 1-2 short, complete sentences.

## Data sources

> For multi selects, we can use a Deephaven table or [URI](uri.md) as a data source to populate the options. When using a table, it automatically uses the first column as both the key and label. If there are any duplicate keys, an error will be thrown; to avoid this, a `select_distinct` can be used on the table prior to using it as a multi select data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For multi selects, we can use a Deephaven table or [URI](uri.md) as a data source to populate the options. When using a table, the first column automatically is used as both the key and the label. If there are any duplicate keys, an error will be thrown; to avoid this, a `select_distinct` can be used on the table prior to using it as a multi select data source.
```

```python order=my_multi_select_table_source_example,countries
from deephaven import ui
from deephaven.plot import express as dx

countries = dx.data.gapminder().select_distinct("Country")

my_multi_select_table_source_example = ui.multi_select(countries, label="Sample Multi Select")
```

## Item table sources

If you wish to manually specify the keys and labels, use a `ui.item_table_source` to dynamically derive the options from a table.

```python order=my_multi_select_item_table_source_example,column_types
from deephaven import ui, empty_table

account_icon = "vsAccount"
columns = [
    "Key=new Integer(i)",
    "Label=new String(`Display `+i)",
    "Icon=(String) account_icon",
]
column_types = empty_table(20).update(columns)

item_table_source = ui.item_table_source(
    column_types,
    key_column="Key",
    label_column="Label",
    icon_column="Icon",
)

my_multi_select_item_table_source_example = ui.multi_select(
    item_table_source, label="User Multi Select"
)
```

## Custom Value

> By default, when a multi select loses focus, it resets its input value. To allow users to enter custom values as tags, use the `allows_custom_value` prop. Pressing Enter when no item is focused adds the typed text as a custom tag. If the typed text matches an existing item's label, that item's key is used instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, when a multi select loses focus, it resets its input value. To allow users to enter custom values as tags, use the `allows_custom_value` prop. Pressing **Enter** when no item is focused adds the typed text as a custom tag. If the typed text matches an existing item's label, that item's key is used instead.
```

        ui.item("Option 4"),
        ui.item("Option 5"),
        allows_custom_value=True,
        selected_keys=selected,
        on_change=set_selected,
        label="Select or type options",
    )

my_multi_select_custom_value_example = ui_multi_select_custom_value_example()
```

## HTML Forms

Multi selects can support a `name` prop for integration with HTML forms, allowing for easy identification of a value on form submission. The `form_value` prop determines whether comma-joined keys or labels of the selected items are submitted via the hidden form input.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_form_example():
    return ui.form(
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Chocolate"),
            ui.item("Mint"),
            ui.item("Vanilla"),
            ui.item("Strawberry"),
            ui.item("Cookies and Cream"),
            ui.item("Coffee"),
            ui.item("Mango"),
            label="Ice cream flavors",
            name="flavors",
        ),
        ui.button("Submit", type="submit"),
        on_submit=lambda event: print(event),
    )

my_multi_select_form_example = ui_multi_select_form_example()
```

## Labeling

> The multi select can be labeled using the `label` prop, and if no label is provided, an `aria_label` must be provided to identify the control for accessibility purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `label` prop to label a multi select. If no label is provided, you must use an `aria_label` to identify the control for accessibility purposes.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_label_examples():
    return [
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            label="Pick options",
        ),
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            aria_label="Pick options",
        ),
    ]

my_multi_select_label_examples = ui_multi_select_label_examples()
```

> The `is_required` prop and the `necessity_indicator` props can be used to show whether selecting an option in the multi select is required or optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `is_required` prop and the `necessity_indicator` props to show whether selecting an option in the multi-select is required or optional.
```

> When the `necessity_indicator` prop is set to "label", a localized string will be generated for "(required)" or "(optional)" automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `necessity_indicator` prop is set to "label", a localized string for "(required)" or "(optional)" will automatically be generated.
```

            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            label="Pick options",
            is_required=True,
        ),
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            label="Pick options",
            is_required=True,
            necessity_indicator="label",
        ),
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            label="Pick options",
            necessity_indicator="label",
        ),
    ]

my_multi_select_required_examples = ui_multi_select_required_examples()
```

## Selection

Use `selected_keys` or `default_selected_keys` to set the selected options.

> `default_selected_keys` is useful for simpler scenarios where you don't need to control the state externally. `selected_keys` is used for scenarios where the state should be managed by the parent component, providing control and flexibility over the selection of the multi select.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`default_selected_keys` is useful for simpler scenarios where you don't need to control the state externally. Use `selected_keys`for scenarios where the state should be managed by the parent component, providing control and flexibility over the selection of the multi select.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_selected_keys_examples():
    options, set_options = ui.use_state(["Option 1", "Option 3"])
    return [
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            default_selected_keys=["Option 2", "Option 4"],
            label="Pick options (uncontrolled)",
        ),
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            selected_keys=options,
            on_change=set_options,
            label="Pick options (controlled)",
        ),
    ]

my_multi_select_selected_keys_examples = ui_multi_select_selected_keys_examples()
```

## Sections

> Multi selects support sections to group options. Sections can be used by wrapping groups of items in a Section element. Each Section takes a title and key prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi selects support sections to group options. Sections can be used by wrapping groups of items in a `section` element. Each Section takes a title and key prop.
```

> Note that, when searching for options, searching by section will not result in the respective options within that section appearing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that when searching for options, searching by section will not display the respective options within that section.
```

Format as a markdown note?

> Also, sections can only be used directly, not from a table data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!CAUTION]
> Sections can only be used directly, not from a table data source.
```

I might make this a caution? or note. Assuming the markdown is the same

```python
from deephaven import ui

my_multi_select_section_example = ui.multi_select(
    ui.section(
        ui.item("Option 1"),
        ui.item("Option 2"),
        ui.item("Option 3"),
        ui.item("Option 4"),
        ui.item("Option 5"),
        ui.item("Option 6"),
        ui.item("Option 7"),
        ui.item("Option 8"),
        title="Section 1",
    ),
    ui.section(
        ui.item("Option 9"),
        ui.item("Option 10"),
        ui.item("Option 11"),
        ui.item("Option 12"),
        ui.item("Option 13"),
        ui.item("Option 14"),
        ui.item("Option 15"),
        ui.item("Option 16"),
        title="Section 2",
    ),
    label="Pick options",
)
```

## Events

Multi selects support selection via mouse, keyboard, and touch. You can handle all these via the `on_change` prop. Additionally, multi selects accept an `on_input_change` prop, which is triggered whenever the search value is edited by the user, whether through typing or option selection.

> Each interaction done in the multi select will trigger its associated event handler. For instance, typing in the input field will only trigger the `on_input_change`, not the `on_change`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each interaction within the multi select will trigger its associated event handler. For instance, typing in the input field triggers the `on_input_change`, not the `on_change`.
```

> Note, this is not the case for selections; when a selection is made, both the `on_change` and `on_input_change` are triggered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> This is not the case for selections: when a selection is made, both the `on_change` and `on_input_change` are triggered.
```

        ui.item("Option 4"),
        ui.item("Option 5"),
        ui.item("Option 6"),
        ui.item("Option 7"),
        ui.item("Option 8"),
        ui.item("Option 9"),
        input_value=input_value,
        on_input_change=handle_input_change,
        selected_keys=selection_state,
        on_change=handle_selection_change,
        label="Pick options",
    )

my_multi_select_events_example = ui_multi_select_events_example()
```

## Complex items

Items within a multi select can include additional content to better convey options. You can add icons, avatars, and descriptions to the children of an `ui.item`. When adding a description, set the `slot` prop to "description" to differentiate between the text elements.

```python
from deephaven import ui

my_multi_select_complex_items_example = ui.multi_select(
    ui.item(
        ui.icon("vsGithubAlt"),
        ui.text("Github"),
        ui.text("Github Option", slot="description"),
        text_value="Github",
    ),
    ui.item(
        ui.icon("vsAzureDevops"),
        ui.text("Azure"),
        ui.text("Azure Option", slot="description"),
        text_value="Azure",
    ),
    label="Pick services",
)
```

## Validation

> The `is_required` prop ensures that the user selects an option. The related `validation_behaviour` prop allows the user to specify aria or native verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `is_required` prop ensures that the user selects an option. The related `validation_behavior` prop allows the user to specify aria or native verification.
```
does the prop use the British spelling? add a link

> When the prop is set to "native", the validation errors block form submission and are displayed as help text automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the prop is set to "native", validation errors block form submission and are displayed automatically as help text.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_validation_behaviour_example():
    return ui.form(
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            validation_behavior="aria",
            is_required=True,
            label="Pick options",
        )
    )

my_multi_select_validation_behaviour_example = (
    ui_multi_select_validation_behaviour_example()
)
```

## Trigger Options

> By default, the multi select's menu opens when the user types into the input field ("input"). This behavior can be changed to open on focus ("focus") or only when the field button is clicked ("manual") using the `menu_trigger` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the multi select's menu opens when the user types into the input field (`"input"`). This behavior can be changed to open on focus (`"focus"`) or only when the field button is clicked (`"manual"`) using the `menu_trigger` prop.
```

            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            label="Select Options",
        ),
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            label="Select Options",
            menu_trigger="focus",
        ),
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            label="Select Options",
            menu_trigger="manual",
        ),
    ]

my_multi_select_trigger_option_examples = ui_multi_select_trigger_option_examples()
```

## Label position

> By default, the position of a multi select's label is above the multi select, but it can be moved to the side using the `label_position` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the label is positioned above the multi select, but it can be moved to the side using the `label_position` prop.
```

        ui.item("Option 4"),
        ui.item("Option 5"),
        allows_custom_value=True,
        selected_keys=selected,
        on_change=set_selected,
        label="Select or type options",
    )

my_multi_select_custom_value_example = ui_multi_select_custom_value_example()
```

## HTML Forms

Multi selects can support a `name` prop for integration with HTML forms, allowing for easy identification of a value on form submission. The `form_value` prop determines whether comma-joined keys or labels of the selected items are submitted via the hidden form input.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_form_examples():
    return [
        ui.form(
            ui.multi_select(
                ui.item("Chocolate"),
                ui.item("Mint"),
                ui.item("Vanilla"),
                ui.item("Strawberry"),
                ui.item("Cookies and Cream"),
                ui.item("Coffee"),
                ui.item("Mango"),
                label="Ice cream flavors",
                name="flavors",
            ),
            ui.button("Submit", type="submit"),
            on_submit=lambda event: print(event),
        )
    ]

> my_multi_select_form_examples = ui_multi_select_form_examples()

Reviewer 2: This is just one example, don't need the array or the pluralization
```suggestion
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_form_example():
    return ui.form(
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Chocolate"),
            ui.item("Mint"),
            ui.item("Vanilla"),
            ui.item("Strawberry"),
            ui.item("Cookies and Cream"),
            ui.item("Coffee"),
            ui.item("Mango"),
            label="Ice cream flavors",
            name="flavors",
        ),
        ui.button("Submit", type="submit"),
        on_submit=lambda event: print(event),
    )

my_multi_select_form_example = ui_multi_select_form_example()
```

Author: Done

Note, this is not the case for selections; when a selection is made, both the `on_change` and `on_input_change` are triggered.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_multi_select_events_example():
    input_value, set_input_value = ui.use_state("")
    selection_state, set_selection_state = ui.use_state([])

    def handle_input_change(new_value):
        set_input_value(new_value)
        print(f"Text changed to {new_value}")

    def handle_selection_change(new_value):
        set_selection_state(new_value)
        print(f"Selection changed to {new_value}")

    return [
        ui.multi_select(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            ui.item("Option 5"),
            ui.item("Option 6"),
            ui.item("Option 7"),
            ui.item("Option 8"),
            ui.item("Option 9"),
            input_value=input_value,
            on_input_change=handle_input_change,
            selected_keys=selection_state,
            on_change=handle_selection_change,
            label="Pick options",
        )

>     ]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    return ui.multi_select(
        ui.item("Option 1"),
        ui.item("Option 2"),
        ui.item("Option 3"),
        ui.item("Option 4"),
        ui.item("Option 5"),
        ui.item("Option 6"),
        ui.item("Option 7"),
        ui.item("Option 8"),
        ui.item("Option 9"),
        input_value=input_value,
        on_input_change=handle_input_change,
        selected_keys=selection_state,
        on_change=handle_selection_change,
        label="Pick options",
    )
```

Author: Done
